How to start working on your MSCS thesis
by Michael Soltys
June 11, 2018

Writing a masters thesis can seem a daunting task. This short document
offers some guidance to make the process more manageable. Please keep
in mind that you should follow the lead of your adviser who may have
different suggestions; this write up is to serve as informal guidance.

Most theses take a form similar to the following:

1. Introduction
2. Background
3. Contribution
4. Experiments and justification
5. Conclusion and future work

The first chapter, Introduction, contains a short motivation to the
topic of the thesis, and a list of 2 or 3 (or more) contributions of
the author (you). These contributions are specific; that is,
"introducing machine learning to self-driving cars" is too broad, but
"implementing algorithm X in C++ and showing that it is twice as fast
as the best contender on inputs over the binary alphabet" is a
specific contribution.

The second chapter, Background, presents all the material needed to
the reading of the thesis. That is, all the definitions, results that
the thesis builds on and the terminology are presented here. The aim
is to ensure that the reader can understand your contributions
precisely. This chapter also contains a literature review (which
sometimes is done instead in the Introduction). This is very important
as it places your thesis in the context of other work done in the
field, and justifies the importance of the contributions.

The third chapter, Contributions, is the heart of your thesis. It
consists in a detailed description of the contributions that you first
listed in the Introduction. This chapter is the technical work of the
thesis, and if the contribution is conceptual it will include
justifications such as mathematical proofs, and if it is a program it
will contain snippets of code and links to GitHub repositories. This
is the chapter that will be read in detail by someone who may want to
make use of your contributions.

The fourth chapter, Experiments and justification, is contingent on
what type of contributions you described in the third chapter. If your
contributions were purely conceptual (e.g., a new proof of correctness
of a known algorithm - say, a stronger proof that establishes that the
algorithm works on more cases than previously asserted), then you may
not need to run an experiment.  But most theses in our field contain a
combination of conceptual contributions and programs; the value of
code is justified by running experiments on some fixed platform where
your program is compared to the main contenders in the field.

Finally, the fifth chapter, Conclusion and future work, repeats the
value of your contributions, and presents the reader with possible
future developments. Rarely a thesis is a final word on a subject, and
a robust future work section shows the depth of your understanding of
the project, and offers enticing prospects for other masters students
who might be interested in the same area. It also ensures your legacy,
in that the future work will be done by researchers who will be citing
your work as the source of their inspiration.

With the above in mind, as you are sitting down to think about your
thesis work, start by selecting a broad field of interest, and as you
read articles and books in the area, narrow down as much as possible a
possible topic of research. As you start thinking and working on the
topic select two or three very specific contributions that you wish to
make. Your adviser will be helping you in this process.

For your reference, the timeline below is a countdown to your
graduation date (either May or December). Keep in mind that you are to
follow the lead of your advisor who may have a different timeline in
mind, more appropriate to your circumstances.

1. Two and a half months: submit your thesis to your adviser who will
take about two weeks to read it and decide if it can be submitted to
the committee. If the adviser decides that the thesis is not ready for
a defense, the process has to be restarted following consultation with
the adviser. 
2. Two months: submit your thesis to the committee.
3. One month: defend your thesis.
4. Two weeks: re-submit your thesis. This is assuming that you passed,
and the committee requested minor modifications. In general, minor
modifications have to do with presentation issues and small
improvements (e.g., run twice as many experiments), whereas a major
modification indicates that there are substantial issues with your
thesis (wrong results, incorrect implementation of major components,
etc.). In the case of major modifications the committee needs to
approve the thesis, whereas in the case of minor modifications only
the advisor needs to approve the final version.
5. Submit thesis with signatures page to the director of the graduate
program who in turn submits it to the school of graduate studies (EU).
